*So what have we learned...

It's hard to believe that the semester is coming to an end. With final projects being put together, and unessays slowly being written, I keep thinking back to by state of mind when I began this course. When I started this course back in January, my primary goal was simple: get better at computers. That was really it. When people would ask me why I took a course in digital history, my response was always the same, "I don't really know much about computers and digital tools, and I feel like that is something I should be working on." With such a vague goal from the start, it's hard to really answer if I got what I wanted from this course. The reality is, the things that I gained from learning about digital history are things that I never really expected to gain, things that I didn't know enough about at the beginning to ask for.

In some respects, this course was what I expected. We learned how to use different digital tools, and we talked about how they could be useful for different types of research projects. I learned some of the basics that I has hoping to learn, including command line, the basic principles behind scripts, and how to automate the processes of gathering and making sense of historical data. Some of the tools, pandoc and Zotero come to mind, I immediate saw the use and incorporated into my knowledge base. Others, like Palladio, AntConc, and OpenRefine, I see the use of, and plan on coming back to them as my research requires. Overall, however, I quickly found that going through these tutorials and learning the basics of these tools, while definitely useful, were not necessay my main takeaway from this course.

More than the tools that we learned, or the basic skills that I now feel that I have, the biggest takeaway, for me at least, has been the process of digital history. While a particular tool may eventually be made obselete by another, or a new operating system may make by basic knowledge of Command Prompt irrelevant, understanding the process of doing digital work is something that will continue to be beneficial throughout these changes. The process of digital history has taught me to think critically about these tools and has caused me to realize that these tools are not objective aids in the historical process, but are loaded with their own limitations, assumptions and blindspots. It can be easy to think of these tools of having no real impact on our research, when in reality the ways that we gather, understand and visualize our data has significant implications for our research questions and the answers we come to. Even though this subjectivity and the implications of digital tools is at times more obvious, these aren't groundbreaking issues that are only a part of research using the latest programs. Something as simple as a Google search, or the use of online library database, significantly influences the direction of our research. What Google shows us as results, or doesn't show us, and the options for online accessible sources, versus print, can and does influence the sources we use in our research. It's just that these ways of researching are more common, and so they are easier to use without thinking about the implications/

Besides the questions this course has made me pose about my own research, the biggest takeaway from this course has been the process of doing digital history. I came into this course, as I've mentioned, hoping to learn some skills that would be useful in the future. I've come to realize, however, that learning how to use a tool and actually taking that knowledge and applying to the rest of my life are two very different things. Although it's easy to learn how to use markdown and pandoc, for example, it's another thing to permanently make the switch in all aspects of my life away from Word. When things get busy and stressful, Word is the default that my brain goes to in order to finish my projects. I'm trying to actively push myself out of this comfort zone, and do more work in other classes in markdown, but it's something that will definitely take time, I'm not sure if I'll ever get there completely. That's what digital history really is, it seems. It isn't the process of learning a tool, which is relatively easy, but it is the longer process of changing the way you do things, which is where the difficulty lies. Hopefully this course will stick with me enough so that I will keep working at that part.
