Future-Proofing Part Two

A little while back, I wrote a post about my newfound appreciation towards future-proofing and all that this idea implies [LINK]. While I still believe in the importance of both present-proofing and future-proofing for my own work, discussions in other classes has brought me back to this idea of future-proofing on a larger scale. Interestingly, the class that seems to consistently have the strongest connection to digital history is my seminar on archival theory and practice. This focus on the digital I suppose is unsurprising, archives of the 21st century are frequently dealing with the new digital medium and trying to figure out a long term preservation and acquisition plan for digital records. As is frequently discussed in this class, archives have had hundreds of years to become really skilled at preserving paper, whereas long term digital preservation has yet to be experienced. 

In some ways, the discussion surrounding the archival preservation of digital objects and records is quite similar to my previous discussion about future-proofing. There are discussions about preserving the digital medium of a record while also ensuring that the record is then able to be opened on future operating systems and machines. Archives want to preserve what it looked like and the experience of playing a computer game developed in the 1990s, for example, but they need it to be able to transfer to modern devices as the original device becomes more obselete and harder to find and/or fix. Archives concerns of future-proofing also extend to the intangibility of digital records. Unlike, physical records, like a diary, that will exist in a tangible way for years or decades without proper archival care, making acquisition less time sensitive, digital records can disappear quite easily and quickly. A website may crash, files and emails can be deleted for space, and documents can become incompatible. These issues brings a sense of urgency of not only figuring out a preservation system, but also being active in acquiring these records in order to preserve them. 

Future-proofing has also come into play in an even more encompassing way, for both a digital historian as well as archives in terms of environmental impact. Although it is easy to think about digital records as ephemeral and intangible, the data centres that maintain these records are very much grounded in the real world. Earlier in the semester we read an interesting article about the environmental impact of our increasing need for online storage [LINK].  The more that we protect ourselves from machine crashing by storing our files in the cloud, and the more that we use online as a work place to learn, collaborate and discuss, the more of a strain we are putting on these data centres and the environment. This is one instance where it seems impossible to future-proof ourselves. To get people to use the digital realm seems unrealistic but the reality of the environmental impact is not going to go away. As we require both history and archives to bring the digital into their work, its important to remember that the problems of the future don't just exist on our machines and in the cloud, but in the long-term, real world impact of our practices as well. 