# Present-Proofing and Future-Proofing Your Work

This week's tutorials focused on markdown and Pandoc. Markdown,
we saw last week, is a really stripped down way to write and
format documents. These plain text files are extremely useful in
that they allow you to move them easily across different devices
as well as convert them easily into different program formats.
Besides allowing "present-you" to easily format the same file into
and HTML file or a Word file, markdown and plain text files allow
"future-you" to not pull their hair out by trying to get a 2010
Word document to open up on a computer that runs 2020 programs that
may not even include Word anymore. Pandoc, on the other hand, is
a command line tool that allows you to take your plain text
documents and convert them into formatted files (PDF, Word, HTML etc.).

It was easy to see the value in this week's tutorials. I remember
several times in undergrad, as well as even highschool, that I had
to mess with the format in order to take documents that I had written
in Word on my own computer, and get them to open so I could print them
on my school's computer. Even living in the same time period, using the
same time of machine (pc) slightly different versions of Word became
a headache I would have to deal with. Now that I am becoming more and more
comfortable with markdown, it seems more and more like the logical choice,
rather than writing in Word from the start. There was also a bonus tool this
week: Zotero. Learning about a program like Zotero, which is a web extension
that automatically saves and formats citation information in your chosen style,
has made this class worth it. If for some reason I don't manage to retain
any other lessons from this class, Zotero has made it worth it.

Zotero aside, this week's tutorials have really help to instill a sense
of preparing for the unexpected. Writing in markdown allows me to not
worry about the future formatting issues of Word and Pandoc makes
the present formatting from plain text to whatever I need less of a
headache. Even Zotero is there to help prevent me from eventually having
to go back and finding a source that I forgot to get a piece of bibliographic
information. It's also made me think more broadly about protecting myself
from computer-related disaster. Everything I write is now backed up repeatedly
on multiple formats. For example, find my notes for this course, as well as
drafts of these posts here on github. Hopefully, as this class progresses, these
lessons of present-proofing and future-proofing will not be left behind. It
would be nice if, for once, I was pleasantly surprised by my pass-self's
computer and formatting habits, rather than dealing with past headaches
and frustrations.
