# Open versus Public

Open access research and notes quickly seems to be developing
into an integral part of not just the field of history, but
of the humanities in general. We have discussed in class how
Open access research is becoming more and more expected. SSHRC,
for example, is now requiring that research be available for
several years. While this does not inherently require online
publication, online and off of your own device is an easy way
to protect from future computer problems and mayhem. There are
also journals now that will publish research notes and things
like data sets.

This new world of posting the process behind the research is
interesting because it has the ability to change the way in which
we research and take notes, in that there is a constant awareness of
an audience component that wasn't there before, at least in the same
way. Although in the past there was an possibility that some day,
after you died, that your notes may become part of the public record,
through the archives for example, there was a stronger sense that these
notes were for your eyes and yours alone. It fits in very well with
the idea of the lone historian working for months in their ivory tower
to produce the work that the rest of the world would get to see. There's
an interesting article, "The Individual Research Archive: Hacking the “Papers
of You" that discusses this shift into from the lone historian, hoarding
their notes, to this public access to the process. The article argues, in
part, for the idea of curating your own notes; changing the process of
just for you to almost a performance of your notes and research process
that is shown to the world.

This almost raising of the curtain, is not out of step with a lot of
other discussions taking place, particularly in the field of Public
History. There's this idea that history needs to become more transparent,
more collaborative, and more public friendly, otherwise... what is the
point. However, similarly to discussions of public history more generally,
open access is dealing with its own discussions of the ideal versus the
reality. Lindsay Thomas, a PhD candidate in English at UC-Santa Barbara, for
example, wrote an interesting post regarding the development of open access
in the humanities. One of the points that she brings up is this idea that
there is a significant difference between openness and publicness. To put
your research notes on a platform like GitHub, for example, is great and
makes them open, but the people who will be able to find and see these notes
is limited to those who know and use tools like GitHub, which is far from
everyone even in the field of history, let alone outside of the field.

I doubt that these problems are going to be answered anytime soon. Like
many ideals in historical practices, small incremental steps may lead us
towards it, however actually reaching it will take much longer than we
would expect. In the mean time, this process of open access will
undoubtedly change the way we take notes, and will impact and influence
those who see them, but there will still be this gap between the small
group this access refers to in a practical sense.   
