The connectedness of Digital History

"It's all connected." It seems like a vague sort of phrase that you would find in an general occassion Hallmark card or a particularly openended fortune cookie. As cheesy as it is, however, the more I work on the final project for this class, the more that I have this phrase floating through my head. For the project, my group wanted to create an interactive twine game, helping windows users in particular navigate the more apple-friendly Programming Historian tutorials. As we started to move forward on the project however, the more aware we became of the fact that these tools cannot exist in a vacuum; that they instead exist extremely interconnected with each other. This is what makes Twine a good platform to develop this interactive narrative, wherever a person wants to start, they can, but they can also click back and forward to other tools as they find the need in their own research. 

We originally set up the project to provide several different options, depending on their needs and interests. We had a "general skills" section that went into advices and tricks involving things like the command line, python, and text editor/markdown. These skills and tools were available to those who were starting out with extremely little knowledge in digital history based on what we ourselves had to learn in order to succeed in subsequent tutorials. We then also set up sections based on broad research interests people may have. These included large scale data analysis, bibliographic tools, and data collection. We quickly realized that these projects were not only incredibly interconnected amongst each other, but also frequently linked back to the "general skills" sections in interesting ways. 

If you are going to use digital history in research projects, it quickly becomes clear that it isn't as simple as learning one tool and moving on. To use one tool means, not only understanding the benefits and limitations in using that particular tool, but also the benefits and limitations of the tools its use is connected to. If you are going to analyse and visualize a large amount of data, for example, you need to consider the things that are highlighted and hidden by your methods of analysis, but also the possible issues with how you got your data to this point. Did you have to clean it up at all? What kind of issues are surrounding the use of programs, such as OpenRefine, to automize the cleaning of your data? Also, where did you get all this data? If you found them individually, what kinds of databases did you search? How did the keyword results and accessibility of databases impact your results? If you used a program to automize the process of data collection, how did the program you used, and the assumptions you made about the data, impact your results? All of these questions are interrelated and all them highlight a possible limitation, or benefit, of your research throughout the rest of your analysis. Ignoring these questions and the connectiveness of digital history tools weakens the conclusions that we end up drawing from our research. While it is easy at times, particularly in history, to ignore how we got to the end result, the process is often just as important and revealing as the conclusions. 