the performance of digital history

In the continuing saga of "What is the final project going to look like"  I have been thinking a lot about the appearance and presentation of the project. This, in turn, has brought up the idea of performance and its role in digital history. Performance is something that cannot be avoided in public history. The very nature of the "public" side of the public history means that we will be creating, interpreting and presenting historical work to the "public". Avoiding the slippery slope that is the discussion of who are we referring to with the term "public," the presentation to the public is inherently performative. Whether an exhibition, a commemorative monument, or an open access digital project, we are not telling history, but performing it through our presentations and interpretive choices. 

In class we have talked about the performative nature of digital history work. The idea that the format we choose, from the large scale decisions of programs and formats to the specific colours and fonts, influence the way the project is perceived and interpreted. Even in our own research, a digital medium can involve a curation of sorts. To post our research notes through programs such as GitHub, for example, we are aware of the possible audience for these notes, and this in turn can influence the ways in which we create these notes. This can include a change in the style or language of our writing as well as an omission of certain aspects of our note taking process. 

It doesnt seem to me that this performativity is something that is strictly relevant for the worlds of digital history and public history. The act of academic writing and writing process in the traditional sense is also performative and highly curated. In the traditional, historian in the ivory tower sense, there is a conscious effort to write in a certain style and format, to present your work in a specific, highly polished sort of way, in order for that work to be considered legitimate and appealing to those who are on the receiving end of this performance. As is often the case, because this process is engrained in our field, it takes a new approach, like digital history, to highlight this performative nature. When it happens in digital history, because it is different, and often visual, the performative nature is more obvious, although it is something that has existed without question in our research in more traditional formats as well. Digital history's ability to begin to pull back the curtain reveals, not only its own performativity, but the performance inherent in all historical work.   