What are we doing versus What is the point?

# What are we doing versus what is the point?

Trying to teach someone else how to do digital history increasingly seems like an extremely difficult task. The more and more I begin to work on the final project I think about the different approaches that people have taken or can take in terms of teaching a particular digital history tool through the programming historian tutorials. There seems to be a constant tension between the practical "this is how you use a particular tool and get it to do x" and the theoretical why are we using this. Most tutorials at least have an introduction explaining what a tool is and why we would want to use it before getting into the step by step guide. The tension comes from this big picture "so what?" question and the focused teaching a skill part. This tension brings up a lot of ideas and thoughts in regards to my own project and work. 

As we discussed way back at the beginning of this course, instructional tutorials can eventually become dated and ineffective if they are not being actively worked on and updated. Programs develop new versions, operating systems change, and new tools replace the old. Only learning the step by step guide of how to use a particular tool can only go so far and only be so helpful. A strictly theoretical tutorial, however, has its own hosts of problems.  While a theoretical approach to digital history tutorials can allow for a discussion of the concepts surrounding a particular tool, both the ones that are helpful as well as those that are a little more problematic, is that it can make it hard to see the direct benefits for a user's specific research needs. As we have found in class time and again, it can be hard to wrap our heads around tutorials that are using data and sources completely separate from our own research needs, and these still include the practical, step by step, aspect. Also, if you understand the theory behind a tool, but don't actually know how to use it, what is the point?

The Antconc tutorial, written by Heather Froehlich, approached this tension in what I found to be a really interesting way. Perhaps because it was a more straaightforward, user friendly tool to begin with, Froehlich uses the step by step guide to then expand on the larger concept and issues at play when it comes to data analysis. The practical explanation of how to use Antconc becomes almost secondary to the problems of using computers to analyse data. She problematizes the habit of digital historian of removing stopwords from word frequency analysist. She also highlights the subjectivity of supposedly "objective" automation of computers, discussing the impact that order, sample size, and comparison of data can have on our research questions. Her tutorial, while not ignoring the "what are we doing" question, takes this foundation and forces the user to question why we are doing it and what is the point and implications of doing it. 

This approach for writing a digital history tutorial brings a lot of new questions and ideas to light in regards to my own project. My group and I want to make an interactive game that is helpful in connecting historians with tools that fit their research needs and does so in a way that is beneficial for all skill levels. While this is definitely useful, Froehlich's approach has highlighted the importance of the implications of these tools and skills, rather than just a practical guide. How will the final project bring in the "what is the point" aspect of the discussion? Time will tell, although it is becoming more and more obvious to me that this discussion is just as important to teaching digital history as teaching the skills themselves. 




