Why digital history is like a DIY

# Why digital history is like a DIY project

There are always those moments when life seems to reflect the lessons being discussed in class. Sometimes there is a direct link, like when you learn about colonization, and then you hear about the Truth and Reconciliation Commission on the news. Other times, though, there are connections that are maybe less obvious: connections that makes sense to you, but if you were to tell them to someone else, it would take a lot of explaining to make the connection clear. A recent experience in the frustrating world of Do-It-Yourself, in some weird way, hammered home some of the key lessons of digital history.

I had been working through the February 22 tutorials (Git Bash, Regular Expression, and Unix) and I was working on them on my own. Although I am trying to get better at not doing these tutorial on my own, sometimes life gets hectic and finding time to work in a group isn't always a priority. I was making decent headway through the tutorials, not having the usual issues of getting stuck and frustrated. Another
issue that I am trying to overcome, although I didn't get to really work on it this week, is to take a step back when things get frustrating. I tend to plan out my time very specifically, so when it is a block of time set aside for digital history tutorials, it's hard to stop and go do something else when things aren't working.

At this point, it may not be clear how this all ties in with the DIY analogy. The same weekend where I was working on these tutorials, my shower rod fell down. The ensuing process of trying to get it back up was easily the most frustrating thing I had attempted all week, if not all semester. I tried to put the old one back up, only to not be able to get the spring to lock. Then, assuming the old rod was broken, I went to the hardware store and bought a new one. I spent two hours trying to get the new rod up, without success. I was even more frustrated by the fact that I had waited until a visiting family member had left, and therefore had no one to help me. After over two hours, in complete desperation, I tried the old rod one last time... and it clicked right into place.

This little story shows all of the habits I've yet to break in terms of digital history coming back to bite me in my attempts at DIY. Everything that I know I shouldn't do: work alone rather than taking advantage of those who could have helped and refusing to take a step back when I became frustrated. What should have been a five minute project dragged on for hours because of these habits. Similarly, working alone and working frustrated in digital history can be just as big of a waste of time. 
